---
title: SEMIC 2015. All about convergent EU IT data and services
tags: [ PSI, open data, events]
categories: [Open Data]
thumbimg: /img/semic_thumb.jpg
postimage: /img/semic2015.jpg
layout: post
date: 2015-05-06 12:34
author: Alessio
comments: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
tags:
- PSI
- open data
- events

---
it was my first time at a SEMIC conference and I found it really a good occasion filled with interesting ideas and development opportunities. The conference opening of [Arnis Daugulis](https://mobile.twitter.com/arnis_daugulis), the young and energetic CIO of Latvia was a great propeller for the entire day. While Latvia is already a well IT developed country the current government still consider this a top priority for a further development of the country economy. Arnis concluded looking forward not only for interoperable EU data but also cross-countries IT services that can ease and boost a more deep cultural and business integration.

The wave for an European Digital Single Market driven by Andrus Ansip have a foam on top where is written "interoperability matter" as the conference chair Vassilios Peristeras remembered twice during his opening presentation ([slides](https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/isa_field_path/presentation_by_vassilios_peristeras-_enterprise_information_management_and_service_portfolio_management_for_the_public_sector.pdf)) and concluding remarks.  For sure the "Only Once Principle" that introduce the needs to collect citizens, business and entities data only one time and have it available whitin the entire Europe member states, is a great driver of innovative services for all the EU citizens and a great opportunity that [Gertrud Ingestad](https://www.linkedin.com/pub/gertrud-ingestad/5/816/b54) quantify in 5bn potential cumulative costs saving for all the 28 EU member states.

For Sciamlab it was a great pleasure to listen the keynote from [Shuichi Tashiro](https://www.linkedin.com/pub/shuichi-tashiro/3/34/8b3) and [Takashi Wada ](https://www.linkedin.com/pub/takashi-wada/46/768/b70) the two delegates from the Japanese Ministry of finance as they admit that integration and interoperability, was a precondition to make finance and country data publicly available and easily accessible by anyone. A process this one that has been promptly activated immediately after the last devastating earthquake and Fukushima disaster when they realized that tons of useful data to deal with emergence situation was not udated or not easily accessible as mostly available into PDFized documents or paper. In few words they have the entire world "demanding for data" and they where not well prepared to give them it. (see [slide1](https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/isa_field_path/presentation_by_shuichi_tashiro_-_japanese_common_vocabulary_project.pdf), [slide2](https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/isa_field_path/presentation_by_takashi_wada-_japanese_common_vocabulary_project.pdf))
It was a pleasure for me to hear that as my company is actually helping the Italian government, ISPRA and the Civil Protection Department building an innovative mapping application that will be a milestone in transparency and information system for mass consultation. It will allow anyone to understand the Italian country territory fragility and risks for hydro-geological upheaval and the actions that the government is doing to deal with emergencies and to reduces risks of flooding. This project headed by Prof. [Giovanni Menduni](http://twitter.com/giovannimenduni) from the Politecnico di Milano University is the first attempts in Italy and Europe as well to make active prevention using already available open data. This is just an example, maybe good enough to demonstrate how public sector information (PSI) can increase transparency but also be reused in the business sector as someone can decide to spur from here  business-friendly indicators and services that can attract customers in markets like insurance or real-estate.

We pay attention to interoperability and despite the first release will be like a public beta, further development are expected to improve the reuse of the data, and strength the model and approach so that it will become easily replicable for all the EU countries.
A huge simplification come also from the EU law framework that are mostly the same regarding the hydrogeological upheaval. The Italian unified hydraulic dangerousness map, produced by ISPRA are now fully available as open data and once again represent a great example of how the openness and interoperability can unlock new business opportunities creating new and unexpected "data value chains". I heard again about "data value and business chains" from Prof. [Sören Auer](http://eis.iai.uni-bonn.de/SoerenAuer.html) from Bonn University here at SEMIC in his [inspiring presentation](https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/isa_field_path/presentation_by_soren_auer_-_creating_data_value_chains_by_linking_enterprise_data.pdf). Presented as academic, believe me it was more business oriented than you can imagine. Sören give several examples on how open and interoperable data is a key enabler for any economu but also a challenge where not only IT experts are called but everyone in every country and every sector.
Also the panel in the afternoon about Public Sector Portfolio Management was very interesting. I asked  if a so critical process like the one to prioritize and decide how to allocate public money for develop, retain or dismiss IT services for citizens and business was for some extent a participatory process where the government make an assessment also using a sort of public (online) consultation.. it was dazzling that nobody within the panelist admitted to have such participatory process in place... so maybe this could be a good starting point to consider for countries CIOs !

Riga, Latvia 
May the 6th, 2015

Alessio
